Output Structure
****************

PeakRDL Python generates a python Register Access Layer (RAL) from a System RDL design. The
generated python code is contained in a package, structured as shown below. The ``root_name``
will be based on the top level address map name with the package was generated

| ``<root_name>``
| ├── ``lib``
| ├── ``lib_test``
| ├── ``sim_lib``
| ├── ``reg_model``
| │ └── ``<root_name>.py``
| ├── ``sim``
| │ └── ``<root_name>.py``
| └── ``tests``
|   └── ``test_<root_name>.py``

In the folder structure above:

- ``<root_name>.py`` - This is the register access layer code for the design
- ``test_<root_name>.py`` - This is a set of autogenerated unittests to verify the register access layer (The unit test generation can be skipped, see ``skip_test_case_generation``)
- ``lib`` - This is a package of base classes used by the register access layer (The copy of this can be skipped, see :ref:`skipping-lib-copy`)
- ``lib_test`` - This is a package of base classes autogenerated unit tests (The copy of this can be skipped, see :ref:`skipping-lib-copy`)
- ``sim_lib`` - This is a package of base classes used by the register access layer simulator (The copy of this can be skipped, see :ref:`skipping-lib-copy`)

.. versionchanged:: 2.0.0

    The ``reg_model`` was changed in version 2.0.0 to split it out into multiple modules rather
    than building the whole register model in a single python module. This helps avoid
    excessively large files which helps speed up the generation and loading time.

.. versionchanged:: 3.0.0

    The auto-generated unit tests were changed in version 3.0.0 to split to make use
    of a test library, which significantly reduced the size of the generated code.

Top Level Classes
=================

.. versionchanged:: 2.0.0

    A new class aliases were added to the ``reg_model`` and ``sim`` packages to allow the register
    model and simulator to be imported more easily. See the example below using ``RegModel`` and
    ``Simulator``.

Class Names
===========

.. versionchanged:: 2.0.0

    In order to reduce duplication within the generated model a hashing algortihm is applied to the
    nodes in the design to determine which nodes are unique. This hash is appended to the name
    of all the python classes in the register model

.. versionadded:: 2.1.0

    There are two possible algorithms for the hashing, this is selectable by the user:

    * The builtin python ``hash`` function, this is fast but is a salted hash so changes hashes export to
      export
    * Use the ``SHA256`` hash from the python ``hashlib`` standard library, this may slow down the export
      of large register models but will be consistent, therefore is useful if the resultant code is being
      checked into a version control system (such as GIT) and the differences are being reviewed

    .. tip::

        Use the default builtin ``hash`` option unless you need to use the alternative

Unit Tests
==========

In addition to the Register Model a set od unit tests are made that test that the register model has been
built correctly

Running the Unit Tests
----------------------

There are many ways to run Python Unit tests. A good place to start is the ``unittest`` module
included in the Python standard installation.


Simulator
=========

PeakRDL Python also generates an simulator, this can be used to test and develop using the
generated package. The simulator is used in a the examples shown earlier in this section. The
simulator has the option to attach a callback to the read and write operations of either a
register or field. In addition there is a ``value`` property that allows access to the register
or field content, this allows the contents to be accessed or updated without activating the
callbacks, this is intended to allow the simulator to be extended with behaviour that is not
fully described by the systemRDL.

.. warning:: The PeakRDL Python simulator is not intended to replace an RTL simulation of the
             design. It does not simulate the hardware, it is intended as a simple tool for
             development and testing of the python wrappers or code that uses them.

.. _skipping-lib-copy:

Skipping the Library Copy
=========================

In some cases it may be desirable to skip the copy of the library from the generated pacakge.
This may be useful in development of PeakRDL-python. It can also be used to avoid distributing
licensed code.

.. warning:: If the libraries are not distributed with the package, it is very important to
             ensure users download the matching version of the PeakRDL-python package to use it

Autoformatting
==============

The generated code is not perfect it often has lots of spare black lines, over time this will
improve but the quickest way to resolve these issue is to include an autoformatter
post-generation. Previous versions of peakrdl-python included the option to run an autoformatter
to clean up the generated code. This had two issues:

* It created maintenance issues when the autoformatter changed
* The choice of autoformatter is an individual one, rather than force an autoformatter on people
  it is better to let people choose their own.

peakrdl-python uses the Black `Black <https://pypi.org/project/black/L>`_ in the CI tests to check
that the generated code is compatible with an autoformatter.